---
categories: syllabus
output: pdf_document
visible: 0
---

# BIOS 691

## Reproducible research tools

<!-- _config.yml -->

**Instructor(s):** Mikhail Dozmorov  
**Duration:** 1 credit-hour, 8 hours  
**Dates:** Monday-Thursday class: June 11 to June 14, 2018  
**Time:** 9:00am - 12:00pm  
**Location:** One Capitol Square, Rm 5009  
**Office Hours:** by appointment  

<!-- index.html -->

**Required course material**: posted via Blackboard and on the course' web site [https://mdozmorov.github.io/BIOS691.2018/](https://mdozmorov.github.io/BIOS691.2018/)

**Software**: 	Unix, R programming environment, GitHub

# Course topics

1. Overview. Steps in reproducible research
2. Unix/command line basics, scripting
3. Text manipulation with regular expressions, `grep`, `awk`, `sed`, `vim`
4. Command line automation with Makefiles
5. Remote computing, SSH
6. Docker containers
7. Amazon Elastic Compute Cloud (Amazon EC2)
8. Best practices of data/code organization
9. RStudio, R functions, and packages
10. Literate programming with RMarkdown/KnitR, bibliography management with BibTex
11. Reproducible presentations and web publishing
12. Data manipulation (`dplyr`) and visualization (`ggplot2`) in R, tidyverse
13. Version control using Git/GitHub
14. Data/code sharing repositories, Licenses and copyright

## Course Description

Reproducibility is the cornerstone of science. In data science, reproducibility aims at delegating the majority of scientific computations to automated workflows. Such automation minimizes potential errors and irreproducibility of the point-and-click approach and makes it easier for others to trace and reconstruct analytical steps. Although the importance of computational reproducibility is commonly recognized, it is still not widely adopted, in part due to little systematic knowledge about available tools for reproducible research.

This workshop-style course will methods, tools, and software for reproducibly managing, manipulating, analyzing, and visualizing large-scale biological data. The goal is to familiarize the students with best practices and computational tools that will have immediate and long-term benefits in everyday work of a data scientist.

This course is not a statistics class. It is a data science-oriented course. Some general knowledge of statistics and study design is helpful but isn't required.

### Expected Learning Outcomes

After successful completion of this course, students will be able to:

- Know the main steps and best practices of reproducible research in data science
- Use command line and other software tools to organize data and analysis
- Effectively communicate the outcome of data analysis in a reproducible report using literate programming and visualizations
- Keeping history of changes via Git version control system
- Facilitate collaboration through code, data and results sharing 

## Prerequisites

- A laptop, Mac or Linux OSs are recommended, but Windows platform is fully supported
- Pre-installed software:  
    - Windows only: [Git Bash](https://git-for-windows.github.io/) or [Cygwin](http://www.cygwin.com/)
    - R for [Windows](http://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/base/) or [Mac](http://cran.r-project.org/bin/macosx/) (download the latest R-3.x.x.pkg file for your appropriate version of Mac OS). Instructions for installing R for Windows [https://youtu.be/Ohnk9hcxf9M](https://youtu.be/Ohnk9hcxf9M) or Mac [https://youtu.be/uxuuWXU-7UQ](https://youtu.be/uxuuWXU-7UQ)
    - [RStudio Desktop](https://www.rstudio.com/products/rstudio/download/). Instructions for installing RStudio on Mac [https://youtu.be/bM7Sfz-LADM](https://youtu.be/bM7Sfz-LADM)
    - Windows only: [Rtools](https://cran.r-project.org/bin/windows/Rtools/)
    - [Git](https://git-scm.com/downloads)
    - A text editor ([Notepad++](https://notepad-plus-plus.org/) on Windows, or [Sublime text](https://www.sublimetext.com/) on any platform)
    - A **LaTeX** typesetting engine. This differs on Mac and Windows. _Note that this part of the installation may take a long time, and is optional._  
        - Windows: Download and install MiKTeX: <https://miktex.org/download>. Read the installation tutorial first at <https://miktex.org/howto/install-miktex>.
        - Mac: Download and install MacTeX.pkg at <http://www.tug.org/mactex/mactex-download.html>. This is a very large download (>2 gigabytes).

## R packages

Install several core packages, listed below. If `install.packages()` generate errors, read carefully the error messages - likely some dependency packages are missing. Install them before installing the core packages.

```
install.packages(c("dplyr", "readr", "tidyr", "ggplot2", "knitr", "rmarkdown", "shiny", "shinythemes", "lubridate"))
```

### Who should take this class?

Both undergraduates and graduate students are welcome to take the course. Auditing is possible contingent on class capacity. Contact the instructor for auditing arrangements.

## Class format

This course will rely mainly on in-class participation, followed by assigned reading and practices with the software tools.

There will be four connected modules, each focusing on an important area of computational reproducible research. Each module will be presented in a traditional seminar format combined with real-life demo of practical tasks.  The students will learn about reproducible research actively — by doing it. 

<!-- _posts/policies/0001-01-01-homework.md -->

## Homework format

- Assignments will be posted and should be submitted via VCU Blackboard, [https://blackboard.vcu.edu](https://blackboard.vcu.edu)
- Assignments should be submitted as reproducible reports in RMarkdown
- Short summaries of Reading assignments should be organized in an RMarkdown report, maintained on GitHub
- Final project should be submitted as a fully reproducible GitHub repository

<!-- _posts/policies/0001-01-01-grading.md -->

# Class rules

* Attendance is required
* Read all assignments before class
* Bring your laptop and the book to every class


# Grading Rubric

## For all assignments

In assessing students' work, the instructor will focus on the following factors applicable to all assignments (specific criteria for each assignment will be detailed later):

- Process: Were the drafts iterated and improved based on faculty feedback?
- Quality and Shine: Is it executed with skill and subtlety, and has it been edited well and - polished?
- Organization and Presentation: Is it presented clearly and in a professional manner suitable - for an audience?
- Effort and Application: Has the work been prepared with careful thought and attention to - detail, and does it take appropriate advantage of the relevant tools?
- Punctuality and Completeness: Is it on time and complete, and does it fulfill the assignment?

## For Discussions

- Preparedness: Has the student completed the work necessary in preparation for the discussion (viewing assigned video, completing assigned reading or tutorial)?
- Participation: Was the student engaged in the discussion (both paying attention and participating)?

## For In-class Exercises

- Effort: Did the student try to complete the exercise to better understand the lesson at hand?
- Participation: If the exercise involves collaboration, did the student contribute?

## For the final project

- In addition to the above grading considerations, each student will grade one peer's project, assigned randomly. The goal here is to learn from peer's work while assessing its quality. Grading by students will be averaged with instructor's grading.

# Assignment Values

## Grading model

<!-- _includes/grading.md -->

Grading for individual assignments is based on the quality of the finished work:

- A being high quality student work with minimal editing required.
- B being good quality student work.
- C being unsatisfactory work.
- D being more than unsatisfactory.
- F being atrocious, unacceptable work.

| Grade |   Percentage  |        Performance       |
|-------|---------------|--------------------------|
|A+     | 97% to 100%   |         Excellent        |
|A      | 93% to 96%    |         Excellent        |
|A-     | 90% to 92%    |         Excellent        |
|B+     | 87% to 89%    |           Good           |
|B      | 83% to 86%    |           Good           |
|B-     | 79% to 82%    |           Good           |
|C+     | 76% to 78%    |      Unsatisfactory      |
|C      | 73% to 75%    |      Unsatisfactory      |
|C-     | 70% to 72%    |      Unsatisfactory      |
|D+     | 67% to 69%    | More than unsatisfactory |
|D      | 64% to 66%    | More than unsatisfactory |
|D-     | 61% to 63%    | More than unsatisfactory |
|F      | 60% and below |       Unacceptable       |

## Assignments Grade Overall

Your grade is based on your performance during the semester. It includes readings, participation and in class exercises (that means you must attend all classes) and assignments, broken down as follows.

<!-- _includes/assignment-weight.md -->

|            Assignment           | Percentage Value |
|---------------------------------|------------------|
|      In-class participation     |        20%       |
| Reading and homework assignment |        50%       |
|          Final project          |        30%       |
|              TOTAL              |       100%       |

<!-- _posts/policies/0001-01-01-deadline.md -->

## Deadlines policy

Deadlines are mandatory. Homework and reading assignment reviews are due two weeks from the date of assignment, unless specified otherwise. Late assignments will not receive any credit, unless discussed with the instructor.

You must turn in your assignments before the date and time given to you as a deadline. For each day you miss a deadline you will drop half a grade on your assignment. Plan ahead and remember: done is better than perfect. It will always be better to hand in something than nothing. If you are having trouble with your assignment let the instructor know immediately, do not wait until it is too late. In return you will get feedback about your assignment from the instructor within reasonable time.

<!-- _posts/policies/0001-01-01-copyright.md -->

## Plagiarism and Copyright

It is a serious ethical violation to take any material created by another person and represent it as your own original work. Any such plagiarism will result in serious disciplinary action, possibly including dismissal from the VCU. Plagiarism may involve copying text from a book or magazine without attributing the source, or lifting words, code, photographs, videos, or other materials from the Internet and attempting to pass them off as your own. Please ask the instructor if you have any questions about how to distinguish between acceptable research and plagiarism.

In addition to being a serious academic issue, copyright is a legal issue.

Never "lift" or "borrow" or "appropriate" or "repurpose" graphics, audio, or code without both permission and attribution. This guidance applies to scripts, audio, video clips, programs, photos, drawings, and other images, and it includes images found online and in books.

Create your own graphics, seek out images that are in the public domain or shared via a creative commons license that allows derivative works, or use images from the AP Photo Bank or which the school has obtained licensing.

If you’re repurposing code, be sure to keep the original licensing intact. If you’re not sure how to credit code, ask.

The exception to this rule is fair use: if your story is about the image itself, it is often acceptable to reproduce the image. If you want to better understand fair use, the Citizen Media Law Project is an excellent resource.

When in doubt: ask.

Observe the [VCU Honor Pledge](https://students.vcu.edu/studentconduct/vcu-honor-system/academic-misconduct-/honor-pledge/) in any class- and homework activities

[University-wide policies](http://www.provost.vcu.edu/academic-affairs/operations/syllabus-statements/)

<!-- _posts/policies/0001-01-01-diversity.md -->

## Importance of Diversity

It's critical that students learn to include a diverse set of voices in their stories -- something that is often glossed over when finding stories in spreadsheets and online sources. You are encouraged to look for stories about and voices from communities that are underrepresented.
